CourseraGettingCleaningData
===========================

# General description
The goal of this project is to facilitate and automate the process of tidying data available below. This project includes a script that reads the Raw data set, transforms the data and creates a tidy data set

## Raw data set
The raw data set can be available at  https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip
Following are the relevant files of Raw data set used in data transformation
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//features.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//activity_labels.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//test/X_test.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//test/subject_test.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//test/y_test.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//train//X_train.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//train//y_train.txt
- getdata-projectfiles-UCI HAR Dataset/UCI HAR Dataset//train//subject_train.txt
 
More information on experiments can be found at http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones 

# GitHub repository
- https://github.com/siwybm/CourseraGettingCleaningData
# Files included in repository
- README.md - this file
- run_analysis.R - a script that transforms data from raw to tidy format
- codebook.txt - description of data included in tidy data set
- TidyData/tidy_second.txt - tidy data set generated by run_analysis.R script on referred raw data

# Data transformation
The process of transformation of Raw data into Tidy data set can be listed in general as following:
* Initial preparations
** Checking the existence of files relevant for transformations
** Output directory creation
* Reading files with variables' names. A separate vector with selected variables is created. Selected variables include the names which in Raw data set contain mean() or std() substrings, denoting the average and standard deviation values respectively. Please note that other variables that may denote mean values (e.g. containing MeanFreq()) were not included into transformation process intentionally. Created vector is augmented with "Subject" and "Activity" names. Some transformations on names were also done, such as removal of brackets, '-' signs, extending abbreviations into more descriptive substrings.
* Reading activity labels and simple transformations (lower case letters, removal of '_' marks). 
* Reading data (including values, activity IDs, Subject IDs) from Test Raw data set
* Generation of intermediate Tidy data set by merging the three sources above. Activity labels and activity IDs are merged  and resulting data set includes activity labels only
* Reading data (including values, activity IDs, Subject IDs) from Train Raw data set
* Combining Train Raw data set into intermediate Tidy data set
* Removal of rows with missing data (if existing) and applying names vector as column headers.
* Saving intermediate Tidy data set into TidyData/tidy_first.txt file. File is saved with single space separator and without row names.
* Final Tidy data set is generated by aggregating intermediate data set by Subject and Activity and applying mean() function to remaining columns. Further on, the final Tidy data set is reordered by Subject and Activity and rownames are applied as a sequence numbers.
* Saving final Tidy data set into TidyData/tidy_second.txt file. File is saved with single space separator and without row names.
* Unused data is removed to save memory.

# Proceeding with script
* Download Raw data set and unzip it into your R working directory
* Download run_analysis.R script into your R working directory
* Source/Execute the script and wait until Tidy data is generated. This may take up to several minutes.
** The two data sets will be stored in .TidyData/ directory as well as these will be available in your R workspace.
